Docs: JavaScript tests (#24903)
web-platform-tests/wpt: docs/writing-tests/testharness.md

# JavaScript Tests (testharness.js)

JavaScript tests are the correct type of test to write in any
situation where you are not specifically interested in the rendering
of a page, and where human interaction isn't required; these tests are
written in JavaScript using a framework called `testharness.js`.

A high-level overview is provided below and more information can be found here:

  * [testharness.js Documentation](testharness-api.md) — An introduction
    to the library and a detailed API reference. [The tutorial on writing a
    testharness.js test](testharness-tutorial) provides a concise guide to writing
    a test — a good place to start for newcomers to the project.

  * [testdriver.js Automation](testdriver.md) — Automating end user actions, such as moving or

>     clicking a mouse.

Author: Unfortunately there's a lint that checks things are listed in a ToC.

  * [idlharness.js Documentation](idlharness.md) — A library for testing
     IDL interfaces using `testharness.js`.

See [server features](server-features.md) for advanced testing features that are commonly used
with JavaScript tests. See also the [general guidelines](general-guidelines.md) for all test types.

> ## Window tests

Reviewer: I can see how this might be a more logical structure for test authors! As a tooling/infra maintainer, I always think of it as "I write the test page" vs. "server generates the test page" on the top level.

Author: Yeah, server documentation is still suboptimal and might warrant another look to ensure common patterns are covered adequately.

### Without HTML boilerplate (`.window.js`)

Create a JavaScript file whose filename ends in `.window.js` to have the necessary HTML boilerplate
generated for you at `.window.html`. I.e., for `test.window.js` the server will ensure
`test.window.html` is available.

In this JavaScript file you can place one or more tests, as follows:
```js
test(() => {
  // Place assertions and logic here
  assert_equals(document.characterSet, "UTF-8");
}, "Ensure HTML boilerplate uses UTF-8"); // This is the title of the test
```

> If you only need to test a single thing, you could also use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you only need to test a [single thing](https://web-platform-tests.org/writing-tests/testharness-api.html#single-page-tests),
you could also use:
```

can be used to include both the global and a local `utils.js` in a test.

### Specifying a timeout of long

Use `// META: timeout=long` at the beginning of the resource.

> ### Specifying test [variants](#variants)

Reviewer 2: It's a little odd to mention variants here before they're introduced below.

Author: Should I make it part of the variants section somehow? It definitely seems better to have variants listed later on.

Use `// META: variant=url-suffix` at the beginning of the resource. For example,

```
// META: variant=
// META: variant=?wss
```

## Variants

A test file can have multiple variants by including `meta` elements,
for example:

```html
<meta name="variant" content="">
<meta name="variant" content="?wss">
```

> The test can then do different things based on the URL.

Reviewer 3: This explanation glosses over an important part of the feature: it doesn't connect the elements to the URL. For instance, "Test runners will execute the test for each 'variant' specified, appending the corresponding `content` value to the URL as they do so." I recognize this part hasn't changed, but would you mind adding something to that effect while we're here?

There are two utility scripts in that work well together with variants,
`/common/subset-tests.js` and `/common/subset-tests-by-key.js`, where

> a test that would otherwise have too many tests to be useful can be

Reviewer 2: s/to be useful/to complete inside the timeout/

can be used to include both the global and a local `utils.js` in a test.

### Specifying a timeout of long

Use `// META: timeout=long` at the beginning of the resource.

### Specifying test [variants](#variants)

Use `// META: variant=url-suffix` at the beginning of the resource. For example,

```
// META: variant=
// META: variant=?wss
```

## Variants

A test file can have multiple variants by including `meta` elements,
for example:

```html
<meta name="variant" content="">
<meta name="variant" content="?wss">
```

Test runners will execute the test for each variant specified, appending the corresponding content
attribute value to the URL of the test as they do so.

> There are two utility scripts in that work well together with variants,
> `/common/subset-tests.js` and `/common/subset-tests-by-key.js`, where
> a test that would otherwise have too many tests to complete inside the timeout can be
> split up in ranges of subtests. For example:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`/common/subset-tests.js` and `/common/subset-tests-by-key.js` are two utility
scripts that work well together with variants, allowing a test to be split up into
subtests in cases when there are otherwise too many tests to complete inside the
timeout. For example:
```

```html
<!doctype html>
<title>Testing variants</title>
<meta name="variant" content="?1-1000">
<meta name="variant" content="?1001-2000">
<meta name="variant" content="?2001-last">
<script src="/resources/testharness.js"></script>
<script src="/resources/testharnessreport.js"></script>
<script src="/common/subset-tests.js">
<script>
 const tests = [
                 { fn: t => { ... }, name: "..." },
                 ... lots of tests ...
               ];
 for (const test of tests) {
   subsetTest(async_test, test.fn, test.name);
 }
</script>
```

With `subsetTestByKey`, the key is given as the first argument, and the

> query string can include or exclude a key (will be matched as a regular

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
query string can include or exclude a key (which will be matched as a regular
```
